
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# chemodiv

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

chemodiv is an R package for analysing the chemodiversity of
phytochemical data

**The package is in development and may not be fully functional.**

The package can be used to calculate various types of diversities and
dissimilarities for phytochemical datasets. This includes the use of
diversity indices and dissimilarity indices that incorporate the
biosynthetic and/or structural properties of the phytochemical compounds
for the calculations, resulting in comprehensive measures of
phytochemical diversity.

## Installation

The developmental version of the package can be installed directly from
GitHub in R using the `install_github` function from the `devtools`
package.

``` r
# Install devtools if not already installed
install.packages("devtools")

library("devtools")

install_github("hpetren/chemodiv")
```

## Usage

Detailed usage notes can be found with `help(chemodiv)` and in the
documentation for each function. In short, two datasets are required.
First, a dataset on the relative relative abundance/concentration
(i.e. proportion) of different phytochemical compounds in different
samples. Second, a dataset with the compound name, SMILES and InChIKey
for all the compounds in the first dataset. The following functions can
then be used:

#### Data formatting checks

Function `chemoDivCheck` checks so that the datasets used by functions
in the package are correctly formatted.

#### Compound classification and dissimilarities

Function `NPCTable` uses the deep-learning tool *NPClassifier* to
classify chemical compounds into groups largely corresponding to
biosynthetic pathways. The function `compDis` calculates and outputs a
list of dissimilarity matrices with pairwise dissimilarities between
chemical compounds, based on their biosynthetic and/or structural
properties.

#### Diversity calculations

Functions `calcDiv`, `calcBetaDiv` and `calcDivProf` are used to
calculate phytochemical diversity in different ways, using both
traditional indices and Hill numbers. `calcDiv` calculates alpha
diversity and evenness. `calcBetaDiv` calculates beta diversity.
`calcDivProf` generates diversity profiles. Calculations of functional
Hill numbers utilize a dissimilarity matrix generated by the `compDis`
function.

#### Sample dissimilarities

Function `sampDis` is used to calculate Generalized UniFrac
dissimilarities or Bray-Curtis dissimilarities between samples.
Calculations of Generalized UniFrac dissimilarities utilizes
dissimilarity matrix generated by the `compDis` function.

#### Molecular network and properties

Function `molNet` creates a molecular network of the chemical compounds
and calculates some network properties using matrices generated by the
`compDis` function.

#### Chemodiversity and network plots

`molNetPlot` and `chemoDivPlot` are used to conveniently create basic
plots of the molecular network and different types phytochemical
diversity and dissimilarity calculated by the other functions in the
package.

#### Shortcut function

Function `quickChemoDiv` uses many of the other functions in the package
to in one simple step calculate and visualize chemodiversity for users
wanting to quickly explore their data using standard parameters.

## Vignette

A preliminary vignette describing an example is available
[here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1AGSrXYAc_iwsbszZdS798_atrfFibdDy/view?usp=sharing).

## Citation

Under construction
